Hi, I'm Patrick from the
OS Performance team at Apple.
Today,
we're going to dive into demystifying and
eliminating render hitches in your apps.
iOS uses the render loop
to display your views,
and hitch is any time the
render loop does not complete
a frame in time for display.
For an overview of the
entire render loop,
check out my talk,
"Explore UI Animation Hitches
and the Render Loop." Here,
we'll focus on render hitches,
which are hitches caused by
slowness in the render prepare
and render execute phases.
First, we'll look at what are
these two render phases.
Then, see how to catch and triage render
hitches in our app using Instruments
and the Xcode View Debugger.
Lastly,
we'll look at some recommendations to
optimize our layer tree and stop hitches
from interrupting our user experience.
Let's start by defining
the render phases.
During the commit phase,
apps modify their UI and submit
updated UI layer trees for processing.
We call these submissions commits,
and the render server is
responsible for rendering commits
for all foreground processes.
If the work in the render server
takes longer than one frame duration,
it can hitch.
Although the work happens
outside the app's process,
the rendering work is
done on your app's behalf,
so you are responsible for how long it
takes to render your app's layer tree.
The render server has two phases,
render prepare and render execute.
The render prepare phase is
where our layer tree is compiled
down into a pipeline of simple
operations for the GPU to execute.
Animations,
which take place over a couple of frames,
are also handled here.
During the render execute phase,
the GPU draws the app's layers into
a final image ready to be displayed.
Either of these phases could
delay the frame's delivery time.
To help understand these concepts,
let's walk through an example render.
We will walk through the
rendering of this frame.
Notice that the shadow is around
both the circle and the bar.
This will become important later.
We start with the layer tree
that the app submitted to the
render server on the left.
The render server will step layer
by layer to compile a pipeline of
drawing commands that allows the
GPU to draw the UI from back to front.
Starting at the root node,
the render server walks from sibling
to sibling and parent to child until
it has every layer in the hierarchy.
Finally, it has the entire pipeline
that the GPU can execute
during the next execute phase.
The GPU's job is to take this
pipeline and draw each step into
the final texture in the center.
It's this texture that will be displayed
on screen during the display phase.
Starting with the first blue layer,
it draws the color in
the specified bounds.
Next, the darker blue is drawn into its
bounds and we move on to the next layer.
But now, the GPU must draw the shadow.
The shadow shape is defined
by the next two layers.
So the GPU does not know what
shape to draw the shadow with.
If we drew the circle and bar first,
though, then the shadow would
occlude them with black,
and it would look incorrect.
That means the GPU has hit a roadblock,
and to continue,
it must switch to a different texture
to figure out the shadow's shape.
We call this offscreen rendering,
because we are drawing somewhere
other than the final texture.
From here,
it can draw the circle and the bar.
And now it has the shadow shape
isolated in the offscreen texture.
It has all it needs to
make the shadow shape,
by first making the layers black,
and then blurring it.
It can then copy that offscreen
texture into the final texture,
and the shadow layer has been completed.
The next step is to draw the circle
and then the rectangle again.
It will finish by copying the image
of the text that the app drew on top.
We have now completed both render phases,
and the frame is ready to be displayed.
But we did have to do a special
trick to render the shadow,
which caused our
rendering to take longer.
This is called an offscreen pass.
An offscreen pass is any time
the GPU must render a layer by
first rendering it somewhere
else and then copying it over.
With the shadow,
it had to draw the layers to
figure out the final shape.
Offscreen passes can add up and
cause the rendering to hitch,
so it's important to monitor and
try to avoid them in your app.
There are four main types of offscreen
passes that can be optimized:
Shadows, Masks, Rounded Rectangles,
and Visual Effects.
We saw an example of a shadow
offscreen in the example render.
In this case, the renderer does not have
enough information to draw
the shadow without drawing the
layer it is attached to first.
The second type of offscreen is when a
layer or tree of layers requires masking.
The renderer needs to
render the masked subtree,
but it also needs to avoid overwriting
the pixels outside the masked shape.
So it will render the entire
subtree offscreen before copying
only the pixels within the masked
shape back to the final texture.
This offscreen can lead to
rendering many pixels that the
user is never going to see.
The third type is related to masking.
Rounding the corners of layers can
sometimes require an offscreen.
If not given enough information,
the renderer may have to draw the
entire view offscreen and then copy the
pixels inside the rounded shape back.
The fourth type is from
visual effect views.
UIKit provides two visual effect types,
vibrancy and blurring.
To apply these effects,
the renderer must copy what's beneath
the visual effect view to another
texture with an offscreen pass.
Then it applies the visual effect
types to the result and copies it back.
You will see this in UI navigation bars,
UI tab bars,
and many other standard controls,
as it's very common across iOS, tvOS,
and macOS.
So these four offscreen types
can slow down the rendering
and cause render hitches.
Now that we've described the
details of the render phase
and seen how a high number of
offscreen passes can cause them,
let's move to our second topic:
finding hitches with Instruments.
In Instruments 12,
we released a new instrument template
to profile hitches in your apps.
Some users have complained about
hitches in the Meal Planner app,
and I'd like to investigate.
So I begin in Instrument and
start scrolling in the app.
And here is the trace of the Meal Planner
app using the animation hitches template.
I'm curious to dive into some of
the hitches I saw while scrolling.
Let's zoom in and expand the
hitches track to find hitch 16.
Each track corresponds to a stage of
the render loop we talked about earlier.
Along the top is the
most important track.
It shows hitch intervals.
This is the amount of time since
the frame should have been ready.
The User Events track shows
the user events associated
with the hitching frame.
The Commits track shows all
commit phases sent to the
render server during that frame.
Make sure to watch Find and
Fix Hitches in the Commit Phase for
more on these tracks specifically.
And here's what we've been
focused on in this video:
the renders and GPU tracks show the
work performed by the render server.
The frame lifetimes track shows the
entire duration that it took to compose
the frame from event to display.
And finally,
the built-in display track shows
all the frames that appeared
on display along with the
VSYNCs that happened along the way.
You can compare the frame lifetime with
the beginning of the hitch duration to
visualize the expected interval that the
frame should have been done composing.
In this hitch, we were two frames over,
and from following the VSYNCs,
we can see that both the commit and
the render phases went over time.
This interval is called
the acceptable latency,
and all time after that
is the hitch duration.
Below the tracks,
we see the detailed metrics
for the hitches when the
hitches track is selected.
We are looking at hitch 16.
We can see the hitch time
and the acceptable latency.
This is how long we had
to complete the frame.
The buffer count is the number
of buffers used by the render
server at the time of the hitch.
The default value is 2,
but it can be 3 when a rendering
frame has been delayed and the
render server is trying to catch up.
In double buffered mode,
we have 2 frames,
or 33.34 milliseconds on an iPhone,
which is what we see
in the latency column.
Always remember to follow the
hitch duration track above,
which will always highlight
the area of interest,
no matter the buffer count.
Lastly, there's the hitch type.
The hitch type surfaces the types of
hitches and helps give you context
on what to dive into in your app.
Here, we see we had both expensive
commits and expensive GPU time,
which is what we saw in the tracks above.
Expanding out,
we can focus on the render and
GPU tracks and select them to see
an analyzer with more information
on the prepare and execute phases.
A crucial column is the render count,
where we can see the number of offscreen
passes that the GPU had to make.
Because we know we had a render hitch,
we need to look at these offscreens
and understand what is causing
them and how we could fix them.
The best way to look at our layer
tree is using Xcode View Debugger.
So for that, let's go to a demo.
Here we are in the View Debugger
with our Meal Planner app paused.
On the left, we see our view controllers,
windows, constraints, and views.
But starting with Xcode 11.2,
we can also show layers.
If we click on Editor,
let's click on the new Show Layers item.
Cool!
Now on the left in the navigator,
we can click on any view and see
its layer and all of its sublayers.
When we select a layer,
we are presented this
brand new layer inspector,
which surfaces useful
properties of our layer.
So we can see here that we have
our tag view's backing layer,
and we can see the background color,
opacity,
whether we have enabled mask to bounds,
and lots of other properties.
Importantly,
we can see the offscreen count.
This is the number of offscreens
it took to render this layer.
Below that are what we
call offscreen flags.
These describe the
reason for the offscreen.
Now, a given flag like offscreen mask,
for example, can trigger multiple
numbers of offscreens.
For example, here we have two.
But if we were to dig through
each layer in our entire app
to check its offscreen count,
we still would not have enough insight
to reduce any of these offscreen passes.
To help identify and suggest
performance optimizations in
your view and layer hierarchy,
we added a new runtime issue
type in Xcode 12 we call
optimization opportunities.
These are enabled by default,
but you can find the option
in the editor menu under
Show Optimization Opportunities.
These optimization opportunities
are an incredible resource developed
and written by Apple's performance
teams after years of optimizing
apps' rendering performance.
These are meant to suggest simple yet
valuable changes that will not affect
the overall look of your layers.
In our navigator,
we can see the purple runtime
issue indicator on some layers.
Here we have our star layer.
We see in the inspector that
it takes five off screens.
Highlighting over the indicator reveals
the cause is because of dynamic shadows.
Let's go to the runtime issue
navigator to see more details.
It's here that we can read
the message for the issue.
It says that the layer
is using dynamic shadows,
which are expensive to render.
If possible, try setting shadow path,
or pre-rendering the shadow into an
image and putting it under the layer.
We discussed this type of
offscreen in the slides.
The renderer does not have
enough information and needs
to draw the layer offscreen to
figure out the shadow's shape.
By using the shadow path
property on the CA layer,
we can actually give the renderer
the exact steps to use and
eliminate all five offscreens.
These really add up in our app,
so let's take a look at the
code and make this change.
Here we are with our star layer,
where we set the shadow.
The optimization text told
us to set the shadow path,
which accepts any CG path.
Let's reuse the star path
that we already created.
Just like that,
we've eliminated 5 offscreen
passes per collection view cell.
That's a big fix.
Now, back on our debug navigator,
we still see some other
runtime issue indicators.
On our tag view,
we see a runtime issue on the layer.
In the navigator, we see two offscreens
caused by an offscreen mask.
This layer is composed of an
image view and a label view.
We were worried about things
escaping the red background,
so we added a mask layer.
In the runtime tooltip,
we see that the cause is simple
background color masking.
In the Issue Navigator,
we see the Opportunity text.
It says that this layer is
using a simple layer with a
background color set as a mask.
Instead,
use a container layer of the same
frame and corner radius as the mask,
but with mask to bounds set to Yes.
The offscreen is caused by the renderer
needing to render our mask layer first,
and the suggestion is to
eliminate this layer altogether.
Let's check it out in code.
Here, we have our tag view.
We create a mask layer and give it a
black background color and corner radius.
This mask layer is simple,
and any simple layer
should never be a mask.
Instead,
we should just define this requested
mask shape on the actual layer so the
renderer can optimize the drawing.
We can instead set the
corner radius to 10,
like we wanted, and then set mask to
bounds equal to true.
Then delete the mask altogether.
But that only eliminates one offscreen.
Because we have sublayers,
Mask to Bounds will need to do
an offscreen pass to make sure
the views are clipped correctly.
But in our view,
we've ensured that sublayers cannot
exceed the bounds of our tag view.
So in fact,
we actually do not need masking at all.
Let's delete that Mask to Bounds call.
And now we've eliminated both offscreens.
Awesome.
So far, with three lines of code,
we've saved seven offscreens
per collection view cell.
This is a tremendous improvement.
But we have one more issue to explore.
Let's head back to the Navigator.
Let's select our image view.
We see that it has rounded corners,
and when we highlight the runtime issue,
we see it says "Simple
Shape Masking." Once again,
we will go to the Runtime
Navigator to learn more.
It says that the layer is
masked by a CA shape layer,
with a path that's a rect,
a rounded rect, or an ellipse.
Instead, use an appropriately transformed
container layer with corner
radius and mask to bound set.
The offscreen is caused by the renderer
needing to mask to another layer again,
but this time it's not a simple layer.
Let's look at the code to
understand what's happening.
Here in the code,
we see we have our image view.
First, we create a CA shape layer and
use a UI-BazirPath API to create a
path and then use that as the mask.
What's happening here is that
we are using a shape layer,
which can be a valid type of mask,
but Xcode is able to detect that
rather than a complex shape,
we are just creating a rounded rectangle.
The reason we wrote this code is
because we are trying to create a
special type of rounded rectangle,
sometimes called a squircle.
These type of rounded rectangles
are very popular in iOS,
but this is not the best
way to get that effect.
Starting in iOS 13,
we can use the corner curve
property to make the corner radius
effect into a squirkeled shape.
Now we can eliminate the shape layer
altogether and just set corner radius
and corner curve to continuous.
Just like that,
we've eliminated two more offscreens
by just using the provided API.
So we were able to really
optimize our offscreen count and
bring it from 36 down to zero.
That's amazing.
Back in the View Debugger,
we see some other runtime issues
that are not render related.
Nonetheless, we'd like to show them
to our coworker Charles,
so he can try and optimize them.
Before,
this would require Charles having the
same device as us and attaching to his
app and pausing it in the View Debugger.
But now, we are able to save the state
of our View Debugger so that
we can send it in an email,
share it with coworkers,
or even attach it to feedback reports.
To do this,
we can select File Export View Hierarchy.
Clicking Save and voila,
we now have a sendable file
encapsulating all of our views,
layers, constraints, and runtime issues.
This makes it much easier
to collaborate remotely,
and will really help as you try tracking
down all your unnecessary offscreens.
Now that we've seen how the
Xcode View Debugger can highlight
offscreen issues in our app,
let's recap some recommendations.
The most important thing to do in every
app is to always use the provided APIs.
When setting a shadow,
make sure to set a shadow path to save
a large number of offscreen passes.
When rounding a rectangle,
use the corner radius and
corner curve properties.
Avoid using masks or corner contents
to form rounded rectangle shapes.
These cause unnecessary offscreens.
For most layers,
creating a UI bezier path by
rounding the layer's bounds to
its corner radius is all that's
needed to set a good shadow path.
The second step is to optimize
masking across your app.
Use Mask to Bounds to
mask to a rectangle,
rounded rectangle, or ellipse.
It's much more performant
than custom mask layers.
Overall,
make sure masking is actually required.
If content in the subtree
will not exceed the bounds,
then disable Mask to Bounds altogether.
These are only recommendations.
It's important to profile your app using
Instruments and use the optimization
opportunities to inspect your layer
tree for simple yet crucial tips to
lowering your overall offscreen count.
Lastly,
remember that you can save the state
of the view hierarchy to share with
your team or even attach to feedbacks
in the Feedback Reporter app.
Overall,
these tools and the recommendations
will help you avoid render hitches.
For commit hitches,
make sure to check out Find and
Fix Hitches in the Commit phase.
Together,
these talks will help you reduce
your app's hitch time ratio and
keep your users scrolling smooth.
Thanks for watching.